# Changelog
All notable changes to the gtk-fortran project are documented in this file. The format is based on [Keep a Changelog](https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.1.0/).

## [forcolormap dev]

### Added
* **Development:**
    * A `ROADMAP.md` file.
    * A fpm workflow for testing.
    * A GitHub workflow for the CMake build by @jchristopherson.
    * CMake support by @jchristopherson.

* **Documentation:**
    * A FORD documentation with a CI workflow, generating https://vmagnin.github.io/forcolormap/
    * `example/colormaps_list.f90` is creating the `colormaps_list/COLORMAPS_LIST_*.md` files using the `Colormaps_info` class.
        * A `colormaps_list/ForColormap.pdf` manual listing all the available colormaps.
        * A link toward the page *ForColormap Collection Categories* was added in the `README.md` to help users choose a colormap.
    * A `gallery/` directory with screenshots of simulations using ForColormap.
    * A `README.md` file in each subdirectory describing the files inside.
    * A `logo` directory with SVG files by @alozada.

* **New modules:**
    * The `src/colormaps_info.f90` module contains information about colormaps, that can be printed or written in the terminal or to a `.md` file. Information can be filtered  based on 8 parameters and printed in 4 different ways.
        * `example/info.f90`
        * `COLORMAPS_LIST.md`: generated by the module.
    * A `src/forcolormap_utils.f90` module with the subroutine `test_colormap()`.
    * A `colormap_parameters` module.
    * A `miscellaneous_colormaps` module.

* **New routines:**
    * A `colorbar()` type-bound procedure to write a PPM file with the colorbar of a colormap.
    * A `reverse()` method to reverse a colormap.
        * A `reverse` boolean option was added to the methods `set`, `create`, and `load` to reverse a colormap.
        * An `example/demo_reverse.f90` example.
    * A `shift()` method to apply a circular shift to a colormap (left is +, right is -).
        * `example/modify.f90` demonstrates how you can modify a colormap with methods like shift(), in concrete cases.
    * Methods `create_lagrange()` and `create_bezier()` in `src/colormap_class.f90` to create a colormap from continuous interpolation of control colors.
        * `example/create.f90` demonstrates creating a custom colormap using methods like `create_lagrange()` and `create_bezier()`.
    * An `extract()` type-bound procedure to the Colormap type to extract colors from a colormap. The extracted number should be within the range [2, levels].
        * `example/extract.f90`
    * A private `check()` method in the Colormap class. It checks the validity of the colormap and its parameters, prints warnings, and fixes problems if necessary.
    * Two private functions: `scale_real_real` and `scale_real_int`.

* **New colormaps:**
    * The "magma", "inferno","plasma", "viridis" matplotlib colormaps in a `matplotlib_colormaps` module.
    * The discrete colormaps of the *Scientific Colour Maps* collection, thanks to the `scripts/gpl_to_lut.f90` program.
    * A `black_body` colormap (miscellaneous).

* A gtk-fortran example using ForColormap: [https://github.com/vmagnin/gtk-fortran-extra/tree/main/reaction_diffusion](https://github.com/vmagnin/gtk-fortran-extra/tree/main/reaction_diffusion)

### Changed
* In  `example/demo.f90` and `example/demo_reverse.f90`, the discrete colormap created from an array is now a colormap designed by @alozada resembling the color changes in red cabbage (containing Anthocyanins) with pH.
* Subroutine `test_colormap()`: the `encoding` argument is now optional (binary by default).
* The colormap `inverted_rainbow` was renamed `inv_rainbow`.
* Renamed `get_current()` to `get_name()`.
* `src/colormap_class.f90`: `private` statement is now the default.
* For writing PPM files, the project [ForImage](https://github.com/gha3mi/forimage) by @gha3mi is now used as a fpm dependency. The related example must now be launched with `fpm run --example example1` and the ForColormap demo by `fpm run --example demo`.
* Code refactoring.

### Removed
* The naive "grey" colormap: you should use "grayC" instead.
* The "inverted_grey" colormap which can now be obtained from "grayC" with the `reverse=.true.` option.
* `scripts/cp_lut_files.sh` since its functionality is now included in the `scripts/gpl_to_lut.f90` program.

## [forcolormap 0.8] 2023-10-23

First code commit.
